Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and paracetamol.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and paracetamol.
Begin by classifying them.
These are the principal non-opioid analgesics.
The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs,
are a large group that inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme and so prostaglandin
synthesis, producing analgesic, antipyretic and anti-inflammatory effects;
they are classified by their selectivity for the two cyclo-oxygenase isoforms into
the non-selective agents, which inhibit both cyclo-oxygenase-one and
cyclo-oxygenase-two — such as aspirin, ibuprofen, diclofenac,
naproxen and ketorolac — and the selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitors,
the coxibs, such as celecoxib and parecoxib.
Paracetamol, or acetaminophen, is considered separately:
it is analgesic and antipyretic but essentially lacks anti-inflammatory action and
has a distinct, incompletely understood mechanism.
Together they form the backbone of multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia,
each with a characteristic efficacy and, importantly,
a characteristic pattern of toxicity.
Describe the mechanism of action of the NSAIDs through the arachidonic acid pathway.
The NSAIDs act on the arachidonic acid cascade.
Arachidonic acid, liberated from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase,
is converted by the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme into the prostaglandins and thromboxane,
which mediate inflammation, pain sensitisation, fever, gastric protection,
renal perfusion and platelet aggregation.
The NSAIDs inhibit cyclo-oxygenase, reducing the synthesis of these prostanoids.
The reduction in prostaglandins at sites of inflammation produces the analgesic,
anti-inflammatory and antipyretic effects,
since prostaglandins sensitise nociceptors and mediate inflammation and the febrile
response.
The same inhibition, however, removes the physiological roles of prostaglandins —
gastric mucosal protection, renal afferent perfusion, and, through thromboxane,
platelet function — which is the origin of the characteristic adverse effects.
So a single mechanism explains both the benefits and the harms of the class.
Distinguish cyclo-oxygenase-one and cyclo-oxygenase-two.
Cyclo-oxygenase-one is constitutively expressed in most tissues and performs
housekeeping functions: the production of prostaglandins that protect the gastric
mucosa, maintain renal perfusion, and, in platelets,
generate thromboxane for aggregation.
Cyclo-oxygenase-two is largely inducible,
upregulated at sites of inflammation by cytokines,
and is responsible for much of the prostaglandin production that drives
inflammation and pain, though it is also constitutively present in the kidney,
vascular endothelium and elsewhere.
The therapeutic rationale of selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibition was to
suppress the inflammatory prostaglandins while sparing the protective
cyclo-oxygenase-one in the stomach and platelets,
thereby reducing gastrointestinal harm.
As we shall see, this succeeded in reducing gastric toxicity but unmasked a
cardiovascular hazard, because the balance between endothelial and platelet
prostanoids was disturbed.
What is known of the mechanism of paracetamol?
Paracetamol's mechanism remains incompletely understood,
which is striking for so widely used a drug.
It is a weak inhibitor of cyclo-oxygenase,
and its action appears to be predominantly central rather than peripheral,
perhaps because its inhibition is reduced in the highly oxidising,
peroxide-rich environment of inflamed peripheral tissue but preserved centrally,
which would explain its analgesic and antipyretic effects with little peripheral
anti-inflammatory action.
Other proposed mechanisms include an action on a putative central cyclo-oxygenase
variant, involvement of the serotonergic descending inhibitory pathways,
and an effect through the endocannabinoid system via a metabolite.
The likeliest picture is a central action involving cyclo-oxygenase inhibition and
the serotonergic system. The practical points are that it is antipyretic and
analgesic but not anti-inflammatory, and that it lacks the gastric,
renal and platelet effects of the NSAIDs.
Take me through the pharmacokinetics of paracetamol and the formation of its toxic
metabolite.
Paracetamol is well absorbed orally, with good bioavailability,
and is also given intravenously; it is widely distributed and has low protein
binding.
It is metabolised in the liver, the great majority by conjugation — glucuronidation
and sulfation — to inactive, harmlessly excreted metabolites.
A small fraction, however, is oxidised by the cytochrome P-four-fifty system,
principally CYP2E1, to a reactive, toxic intermediate,
N-acetyl-para-benzoquinone imine, abbreviated NAPQI.
At therapeutic doses this small amount of NAPQI is immediately detoxified by
conjugation with hepatic glutathione.
In overdose the conjugation pathways are saturated,
more paracetamol is shunted to NAPQI, glutathione is depleted,
and the unneutralised NAPQI binds to hepatocyte proteins causing centrilobular
hepatic necrosis.
This is the basis of paracetamol's hepatotoxicity in overdose and of its antidote.
Describe the principal indications and analgesic efficacy of these drugs.
Paracetamol is used for mild to moderate pain and as an antipyretic,
and it is a cornerstone of multimodal analgesia,
given regularly to reduce opioid requirement;
it is safe and well tolerated at therapeutic doses and free of the NSAID
toxicities, which makes it the default baseline analgesic.
The NSAIDs are effective for mild to moderate pain,
and particularly for pain with an inflammatory or nociceptive component —
musculoskeletal pain, dysmenorrhoea, postoperative pain, renal and biliary colic,
and inflammatory conditions — and they too are valuable opioid-sparing agents in
the perioperative period.
Combining paracetamol and an NSAID gives additive analgesia.
Both are used as antipyretics. So they are the foundation of non-opioid analgesia,
paracetamol as the gentle baseline and the NSAIDs adding anti-inflammatory
analgesic power where their risks permit.
Now the adverse effects of the NSAIDs — begin with the gastrointestinal.
Gastrointestinal toxicity is the commonest serious adverse effect of the NSAIDs.
By inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase-one, they remove the protective prostaglandins that
maintain gastric mucosal blood flow, mucus and bicarbonate secretion,
leaving the mucosa vulnerable to acid; the result is dyspepsia,
gastric and duodenal erosions and ulcers,
and the dangerous complications of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation.
The risk is increased by age, prior ulcer disease, high dose, prolonged use,
concurrent steroids or anticoagulants, and Helicobacter infection.
It is reduced by using the lowest effective dose for the shortest time,
by co-prescribing a proton-pump inhibitor for those at risk,
and by using a selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitor,
which largely spares the gastric mucosa.
So gastrointestinal harm is a central,
prostaglandin-mediated limitation of the non-selective NSAIDs.
Explain the renal effects.
In the kidney, prostaglandins maintain renal blood flow and glomerular filtration,
particularly by dilating the afferent arteriole,
an effect that becomes important when renal perfusion is threatened — in
hypovolaemia, hypotension, heart failure,
cirrhosis or pre-existing renal impairment — when the kidney depends on
prostaglandin-mediated vasodilatation to preserve filtration.
By inhibiting this, NSAIDs can precipitate acute kidney injury in these states.
They also cause sodium and water retention,
which can worsen hypertension and heart failure, and hyperkalaemia.
A particular danger is the combination of an NSAID with a diuretic and a
renin-angiotensin blocker — the so-called triple whammy — which markedly increases
the risk of acute kidney injury.
So NSAIDs are used with great caution, or avoided,
wherever renal perfusion is compromised,
which is common in the perioperative and acutely ill patient.
Describe the effects on platelets and the special position of aspirin.
NSAIDs inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase-one-dependent production of thromboxane in
platelets, impairing platelet aggregation and so prolonging bleeding time,
which is reversible for most NSAIDs as the drug is cleared.
Aspirin is distinct: it inhibits platelet cyclo-oxygenase irreversibly,
by acetylating the enzyme, so that the affected platelet is impaired for its whole
lifespan of around a week, since platelets cannot synthesise new enzyme.
This irreversible antiplatelet effect is the basis of low-dose aspirin's use in
cardiovascular prophylaxis, where a small dose permanently inactivates platelet
thromboxane production while sparing the endothelial prostacyclin.
The perioperative implication is that NSAIDs increase bleeding, reversibly,
and that aspirin's effect persists for the platelet lifespan,
both of which must be weighed against the bleeding risk of surgery.
What is the cardiovascular concern, and how did the coxib story unfold?
The selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitors were developed to spare the stomach,
and they did, but large trials revealed an increased risk of thrombotic
cardiovascular events — myocardial infarction and stroke — leading to the
withdrawal of rofecoxib.
The mechanism is thought to be an imbalance:
cyclo-oxygenase-two in the vascular endothelium produces prostacyclin,
which is antithrombotic and vasodilator,
while platelet thromboxane is produced by cyclo-oxygenase-one;
selectively inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase-two reduces the protective prostacyclin
while leaving platelet thromboxane intact, tipping the balance towards thrombosis.
It then emerged that the non-selective NSAIDs, except perhaps naproxen,
also carry some thrombotic risk.
So all NSAIDs are now regarded as carrying a cardiovascular hazard,
greatest with the coxibs and diclofenac and least with naproxen,
and they are used cautiously in those with cardiovascular disease.
Tell me about aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease and other hypersensitivity.
Some patients, particularly those with asthma,
nasal polyps and chronic rhinosinusitis,
develop bronchospasm and rhinorrhoea on exposure to aspirin and other
cyclo-oxygenase-inhibiting NSAIDs — aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease,
sometimes called Samter's triad.
The mechanism is not allergic but pharmacological:
inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase shunts arachidonic acid down the lipoxygenase
pathway, increasing the production of bronchoconstrictor leukotrienes.
Such patients should avoid NSAIDs, and a careful history of asthma and aspirin
sensitivity is taken before prescribing. True allergic reactions to NSAIDs also
occur.
The practical point is to ask about asthma and previous reactions to NSAIDs,
and to avoid them in the patient with a history of NSAID-induced bronchospasm,
in whom paracetamol and other analgesics are used instead.
So NSAID respiratory sensitivity is an important, mechanism-based contraindication.
Describe the clinical features and management of paracetamol overdose.
Paracetamol overdose is a common and dangerous poisoning.
In the first day there may be few symptoms, or nausea and malaise,
which is treacherous; hepatic injury then develops over the following days,
with rising transaminases, jaundice, coagulopathy and, in severe cases,
fulminant hepatic failure with encephalopathy, lactic acidosis,
renal failure and death.
Management rests on the timed plasma paracetamol concentration plotted against a
treatment nomogram to decide on the antidote, N-acetylcysteine,
which replenishes glutathione and so allows the toxic NAPQI to be detoxified;
it is most effective given early but is given late in significant poisoning and in
staggered overdose.
Supportive care, and assessment for transplantation using the King's College
criteria in fulminant failure, complete the management.
Early recognition and timely acetylcysteine prevent most deaths.
What are the contraindications and cautions for NSAIDs?
NSAIDs are contraindicated or used with great caution in:
active peptic ulceration or a history of gastrointestinal bleeding;
significant renal impairment or states of compromised renal perfusion such as
hypovolaemia, heart failure and cirrhosis;
the combination with diuretics and renin-angiotensin blockers;
significant cardiovascular disease, given the thrombotic risk;
bleeding disorders and where surgical bleeding is a concern;
aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease and known NSAID hypersensitivity;
the third trimester of pregnancy, because of premature closure of the ductus
arteriosus and other fetal effects; and severe hepatic impairment.
Aspirin is avoided in children because of Reye's syndrome.
In all cases the lowest effective dose for the shortest time is used,
with gastric and renal protection for those at risk.
So the cautions follow directly from the prostaglandin-dependent adverse effects.
Compare the commonly used agents.
Among the non-selective NSAIDs, ibuprofen has a relatively favourable balance of
efficacy and gastrointestinal safety at standard doses and is a common first
choice; naproxen is longer-acting and appears to carry the least cardiovascular
risk, making it preferred where that is a concern;
diclofenac is effective but carries a higher cardiovascular risk;
ketorolac is a potent parenteral NSAID useful for acute postoperative pain but with
notable gastrointestinal and renal toxicity,
so its use is limited in dose and duration.
Among the selective agents, celecoxib orally and parecoxib parenterally spare the
stomach and do not impair platelets,
useful where gastric or bleeding risk dominates,
but carry the cardiovascular caution. Aspirin is now used chiefly as an
antiplatelet rather than an analgesic.
Paracetamol stands apart as the gentle baseline.
So the choice balances efficacy against the relevant gastric, renal,
cardiovascular and bleeding risks.
What is the role of these drugs in perioperative multimodal analgesia?
Paracetamol and the NSAIDs are central to multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia,
given regularly alongside regional techniques and opioids to provide additive
analgesia and reduce opioid dose and its side-effects,
a principle embedded in enhanced-recovery pathways.
Paracetamol is used almost universally as the baseline,
being safe and well tolerated.
NSAIDs are added where their efficacy is wanted and their risks acceptable,
particularly for inflammatory and musculoskeletal pain,
with attention to the surgical bleeding risk,
renal perfusion in the fasted or hypovolaemic patient,
and any cardiovascular or gastric contraindication.
A coxib or parecoxib may be chosen where platelet sparing matters.
So in the perioperative setting these drugs are the foundation on which
opioid-sparing analgesia is built, used judiciously according to each patient's
bleeding, renal and cardiovascular profile.
Is there a concern about NSAIDs and surgical healing or anastomotic leak?
There has been debate about whether NSAIDs impair healing.
The clearest concern is a reported association between NSAID use and anastomotic
leak after gastrointestinal surgery, particularly colorectal anastomoses,
in some observational studies, attributed to effects of prostaglandin inhibition on
tissue healing and the inflammatory response,
though the evidence is not conclusive and trial data are mixed.
There is also a theoretical concern about effects on bone healing.
The practical response is caution rather than prohibition:
many surgeons limit or avoid NSAIDs around gastrointestinal anastomoses and certain
bone surgery, weighing the analgesic benefit against the possible risk,
and decisions are often made locally with the surgical team.
So this is an area of genuine uncertainty in which NSAID use is individualised and
discussed with the surgeon.
Pull it together: how do you use paracetamol and NSAIDs rationally?
I would use paracetamol as the routine baseline analgesic and antipyretic in almost
all patients, given regularly, for its efficacy in combination,
its opioid-sparing effect and its excellent safety at therapeutic doses,
while respecting the dose limit and the danger of overdose.
I would add an NSAID where its anti-inflammatory analgesic power is wanted and the
patient's profile permits — avoiding it in significant renal impairment or
compromised renal perfusion, active or past peptic ulceration,
significant cardiovascular disease, bleeding concern,
NSAID-sensitive asthma and the third trimester — using the lowest effective dose
for the shortest time, with gastric protection for those at risk,
and choosing naproxen where cardiovascular risk dominates or a coxib where gastric
and bleeding sparing matters.
Embedded in multimodal analgesia, these drugs reduce opioid use substantially,
which is their great value, provided their characteristic toxicities are respected.
Describe the physiological roles of prostaglandins,
so the adverse effects make sense.
Prostaglandins are local hormones with diverse physiological roles,
which is why inhibiting their synthesis has such widespread effects.
In the stomach they maintain mucosal integrity by promoting mucus and bicarbonate
secretion and mucosal blood flow.
In the kidney they dilate the afferent arteriole to preserve renal blood flow and
glomerular filtration, particularly when perfusion is threatened,
and they modulate sodium handling.
In platelets, thromboxane promotes aggregation,
while in the vascular endothelium prostacyclin is antithrombotic and vasodilator.
They mediate inflammation, sensitise nociceptors to produce pain,
and generate fever in the hypothalamus.
In pregnancy they maintain ductal patency in the fetus and contribute to labour.
So inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis relieves pain,
inflammation and fever but simultaneously removes gastric protection,
renal autoregulation and the platelet-endothelial balance,
which is the unifying explanation of the NSAID adverse-effect profile.
Give the detailed pharmacology of aspirin.
Aspirin, acetylsalicylic acid, is the original NSAID,
distinctive for irreversibly acetylating cyclo-oxygenase.
In platelets, which cannot synthesise new enzyme,
this gives a permanent antiplatelet effect lasting the platelet lifespan of about a
week, the basis of low-dose aspirin in cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
prophylaxis, where a small daily dose inhibits platelet thromboxane while sparing
endothelial prostacyclin.
At higher analgesic and anti-inflammatory doses it shares the NSAID effects and
toxicities.
It is metabolised to salicylate, and in overdose causes salicylate poisoning,
with a characteristic mixed respiratory alkalosis from direct respiratory
stimulation and metabolic acidosis, tinnitus, hyperthermia and, in severe cases,
coma, treated with supportive care, urinary alkalinisation and haemodialysis.
Crucially, aspirin is avoided in children because of its association with Reye's
syndrome, a rare encephalopathy with hepatic failure.
So aspirin is now chiefly an antiplatelet drug with these specific toxicities.
What are the dosing and the intravenous use of paracetamol?
Paracetamol is given orally, rectally and intravenously,
in a dose for an adult of around one gram up to four times daily,
not exceeding the maximum daily dose, with reduction in the low-weight, frail,
malnourished or hepatically impaired patient, in whom a lower ceiling is used.
The intravenous preparation is widely used perioperatively,
giving reliable plasma concentrations and a useful opioid-sparing analgesic effect,
and is valuable when the oral route is unavailable;
care is taken with the dose in low body weight,
where weight-based dosing avoids inadvertent overdose,
and infusion errors with the intravenous form have caused harm.
The regular administration of paracetamol as the baseline of multimodal analgesia
is one of the most useful and safe measures in perioperative pain management,
provided the dose is appropriate to the patient and the maximum is respected.
Why are some patients more vulnerable to paracetamol hepatotoxicity?
Vulnerability depends on the balance between the formation of the toxic metabolite
NAPQI and its detoxification by glutathione.
Patients are at increased risk where glutathione stores are depleted or where NAPQI
formation is increased.
Glutathione is depleted by malnutrition, chronic alcohol excess, eating disorders,
prolonged fasting and serious illness,
so the chronically malnourished or alcoholic patient may be harmed by doses at or
near the therapeutic range.
Induction of the cytochrome enzyme CYP2E1,
by chronic alcohol and enzyme-inducing drugs, increases the production of NAPQI.
For these reasons, a lower maximum dose is used in the low-weight and at-risk
patient, and treatment thresholds for overdose are lowered in those with risk
factors for glutathione depletion.
So the same dose is not equally safe in all patients,
and the at-risk groups warrant caution.
What are the important drug interactions of the NSAIDs?
NSAIDs have several clinically important interactions.
With anticoagulants such as warfarin and the direct oral anticoagulants,
and with antiplatelet drugs, they increase the risk of bleeding,
both through their own antiplatelet effect and, for some,
by displacing warfarin from protein binding.
With antihypertensives, particularly angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors,
angiotensin-receptor blockers and diuretics,
they reduce the antihypertensive effect and,
in the triple combination with a diuretic,
markedly increase the risk of acute kidney injury.
They reduce the renal clearance of lithium and methotrexate,
raising their concentrations to toxic levels.
They add to the gastrointestinal risk of corticosteroids.
And they may interact with other nephrotoxic drugs.
So before prescribing an NSAID I would check for anticoagulants,
antihypertensives and diuretics, lithium and methotrexate,
which are the interactions most likely to cause harm.
Is there a therapeutic use of prostaglandin inhibition on the ductus arteriosus?
Yes — a neat therapeutic application of NSAID pharmacology.
Patency of the fetal ductus arteriosus is maintained by prostaglandins,
and in the preterm neonate a persistent patent ductus arteriosus can cause
significant haemodynamic problems.
An NSAID — indometacin or ibuprofen — given to the neonate inhibits prostaglandin
synthesis and promotes closure of the ductus,
an effective pharmacological alternative to surgical ligation in selected infants.
The same mechanism is the reason NSAIDs are contraindicated in the third trimester
of pregnancy, because by inhibiting prostaglandins they can cause premature
constriction or closure of the fetal ductus in utero,
as well as oligohydramnios and effects on fetal renal function.
So prostaglandin inhibition both treats a patent ductus after birth and threatens
premature ductal closure before it, two sides of the same pharmacology.
Tell me about ketorolac and the parenteral NSAIDs in acute pain.
Ketorolac is a potent non-selective NSAID available parenterally,
valued for strong analgesia in acute postoperative pain,
comparable in some settings to opioids and useful as an opioid-sparing agent.
Its potency comes with prominent NSAID toxicity, however:
it carries a significant risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and of renal impairment,
and it impairs platelet function, so its use is restricted to a limited dose and a
short duration, typically a few days,
and it is avoided in those at risk of bleeding or renal injury and around
procedures with a high bleeding risk.
Parecoxib, the parenteral selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitor,
is an alternative that spares platelets and the gastric mucosa,
useful where bleeding risk dominates.
So ketorolac is a powerful parenteral analgesic whose toxicity mandates short,
limited use, with parecoxib an option where platelet sparing is wanted.
How would you choose an NSAID in a patient with cardiovascular risk?
Where cardiovascular risk dominates,
I would first consider whether an NSAID is needed at all,
preferring paracetamol and other multimodal measures.
If an NSAID is used, I would choose the agent with the least thrombotic risk and
the lowest effective dose for the shortest time.
The evidence suggests naproxen carries the lowest cardiovascular risk of the
commonly used agents, probably because its sustained inhibition of platelet
thromboxane offsets the prothrombotic effect,
so it is generally preferred in the cardiovascular patient.
I would avoid the agents with the greatest thrombotic risk — the selective
cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitors and diclofenac — in such patients.
I would also be mindful of the sodium and water retention worsening hypertension
and heart failure, and of the renal risk.
So naproxen at the lowest dose for the shortest time, or avoidance,
is my approach in the cardiovascular patient.
Explain the antipyretic action and how it differs between these drugs.
Fever is produced when pyrogens, through cytokines,
stimulate the synthesis of prostaglandin in the hypothalamus,
raising the thermoregulatory set-point so that the body generates and conserves
heat.
Both the NSAIDs and paracetamol are antipyretic because they inhibit this
hypothalamic prostaglandin synthesis,
lowering the set-point back towards normal and allowing the elevated temperature to
fall through normal heat-loss mechanisms.
They reduce a raised temperature but do not lower a normal one.
Paracetamol is effective as an antipyretic despite its weak peripheral
anti-inflammatory action, consistent with its predominantly central effect.
So the antipyretic action is a central,
prostaglandin-mediated lowering of the hypothalamic set-point,
shared by paracetamol and the NSAIDs, and it is distinct from their analgesic and,
for the NSAIDs, peripheral anti-inflammatory effects.
Summarise the strategies for gastroprotection with NSAIDs.
Gastrointestinal protection is directed at the patients most at risk — the elderly,
those with previous ulcer or bleeding, and those on concurrent steroids,
anticoagulants or antiplatelets.
The strategies are: to question whether an NSAID is needed and to use paracetamol
and other measures instead; to use the lowest effective dose for the shortest time;
to co-prescribe a proton-pump inhibitor,
which substantially reduces the risk of ulceration and bleeding and is the standard
gastroprotective measure; to choose a selective cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitor,
which spares the gastric mucosa, in those at high gastrointestinal but acceptable
cardiovascular risk, often still with a proton-pump inhibitor;
and to eradicate Helicobacter pylori where present.
So gastroprotection combines avoiding or minimising the NSAID,
co-prescribing a proton-pump inhibitor,
and selecting a cyclo-oxygenase-two-sparing agent,
tailored to the individual's gastric and cardiovascular risk.
Compare paracetamol and NSAIDs as a combination in multimodal analgesia.
Paracetamol and an NSAID act by overlapping but not identical mechanisms and have
additive analgesic effects, so combining them gives better analgesia than either
alone and is a standard component of multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia.
Paracetamol provides safe baseline analgesia and antipyresis without the gastric,
renal, platelet and cardiovascular toxicities of the NSAIDs,
while the NSAID adds anti-inflammatory analgesic power for nociceptive and
inflammatory pain.
The combination, given regularly alongside regional techniques and minimal opioids,
substantially reduces opioid requirement and its side-effects within
enhanced-recovery pathways.
The NSAID component is added only where the patient's bleeding,
renal and cardiovascular profile permits.
So paracetamol and an NSAID together form the analgesic foundation,
paracetamol universally and the NSAID selectively,
on which opioid-sparing perioperative analgesia is built.
What is the place of topical NSAIDs and of systemic lidocaine, briefly,
in this analgesic landscape?
Topical NSAIDs, applied to the skin over a painful joint or soft-tissue injury,
deliver the drug locally with much lower systemic absorption,
providing useful analgesia for localised musculoskeletal pain with far less of the
systemic gastrointestinal, renal and cardiovascular toxicity,
making them a safer option for localised pain, particularly in the elderly.
They are a useful adjunct in the multimodal toolkit for appropriate conditions.
Although lidocaine is a local anaesthetic rather than an NSAID,
intravenous lidocaine infusion has emerged as another non-opioid,
opioid-sparing analgesic adjunct used perioperatively,
particularly in abdominal surgery, with analgesic and anti-inflammatory and
gut-recovery benefits, within multimodal pathways and with appropriate monitoring
for toxicity.
So the non-opioid analgesic landscape extends beyond systemic NSAIDs and
paracetamol to topical NSAIDs and adjuncts such as lidocaine infusion,
all serving the goal of opioid-sparing analgesia.
What are the relative durations and a practical comparison of the agents?
The agents differ in duration, which guides dosing frequency.
Ibuprofen is short-acting, requiring several doses a day,
with a relatively favourable safety profile at standard doses.
Diclofenac is intermediate.
Naproxen is longer-acting, allowing twice-daily dosing,
with the lowest cardiovascular risk. Ketorolac is for short-term parenteral use
only. Among the selective agents, celecoxib is taken once or twice daily.
Paracetamol is given four times daily.
Practically, for mild pain I would use paracetamol;
for nociceptive or inflammatory pain I would add an NSAID,
choosing ibuprofen for general use, naproxen where cardiovascular risk matters,
a coxib or parecoxib where gastric or bleeding sparing is wanted,
and ketorolac or parecoxib parenterally for acute postoperative pain,
always at the lowest effective dose for the shortest time.
So duration, efficacy and the toxicity profile together determine the practical
choice.
Give a final integrated view of these non-opioid analgesics.
These drugs are the indispensable foundation of non-opioid,
opioid-sparing analgesia, and their rational use rests on understanding that a
single mechanism — inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis — produces both their
benefits and their harms.
Paracetamol, with its distinct, mainly central mechanism,
is the safe baseline used almost universally,
its only major danger being hepatotoxicity in overdose, treated with acetylcysteine.
The NSAIDs add powerful anti-inflammatory analgesia but carry the
prostaglandin-dependent gastric, renal, platelet and cardiovascular toxicities,
so they are added selectively, at the lowest effective dose for the shortest time,
avoided where renal perfusion, gastric history, bleeding risk,
cardiovascular disease, NSAID-sensitive asthma or late pregnancy contraindicate
them, with gastroprotection for those at risk.
Used thus within multimodal analgesia,
they substantially reduce opioid requirement and its harms,
which is their central contribution to modern pain management.
Describe the spectrum of cyclo-oxygenase selectivity across the agents.
The NSAIDs lie along a spectrum of relative selectivity for the two cyclo-oxygenase
isoforms rather than falling into rigid categories.
At one end are agents that inhibit both isoforms fairly equally,
such as ibuprofen and naproxen; aspirin is non-selective but irreversible.
Some agents, such as diclofenac and meloxicam,
are somewhat preferential for cyclo-oxygenase-two.
At the other end are the coxibs — celecoxib,
parecoxib and etoricoxib — designed for marked selectivity for cyclo-oxygenase-two,
sparing cyclo-oxygenase-one and so the stomach and platelets.
The greater the cyclo-oxygenase-two selectivity,
the less the gastrointestinal and antiplatelet effect but, in general,
the greater the relative cardiovascular thrombotic risk,
because of the prostacyclin-thromboxane imbalance.
So selectivity is a continuum that predicts the trade-off between gastric safety
and cardiovascular risk, which guides agent choice for the individual patient.
Give more detail on the paracetamol overdose nomogram and the difficult
presentations.
For a single acute overdose at a known time,
the plasma paracetamol concentration is measured at or after four hours and plotted
against time on a treatment nomogram; if it lies above the treatment line,
N-acetylcysteine is given. Several presentations are more difficult.
In staggered overdose, taken over a period,
and in presentations where the time is unknown,
the nomogram cannot be used reliably,
and acetylcysteine is given based on the dose and clinical and biochemical
assessment.
Late presentation, beyond the window of greatest acetylcysteine efficacy,
still warrants treatment because acetylcysteine has benefit even late,
including in established hepatic failure. At-risk patients with glutathione
depletion may need treatment at lower concentrations.
So while the nomogram guides the straightforward acute overdose, staggered,
late and high-risk presentations require treatment on clinical grounds with a low
threshold for acetylcysteine.
How are antiplatelet doses of aspirin and NSAIDs managed around surgery?
Perioperative management balances bleeding against thrombotic risk.
Low-dose aspirin taken for secondary cardiovascular prevention is often continued
through surgery, because the thrombotic risk of stopping it may outweigh the modest
increase in surgical bleeding, the decision depending on the procedure's bleeding
risk and the indication; for primary prevention it is more often stopped.
Where aspirin is stopped, its antiplatelet effect persists for the platelet
lifespan of about a week, so it is stopped several days before surgery if cessation
is chosen.
Other NSAIDs have a reversible antiplatelet effect that resolves as the drug is
cleared, over a period related to their half-life,
so they are stopped a short time before procedures with a significant bleeding risk.
So aspirin is frequently continued for secondary prevention,
and the timing of stopping any antiplatelet reflects its mechanism and the balance
of risks, decided with the surgical team.
What special cautions apply to NSAIDs in the elderly?
The elderly are particularly vulnerable to NSAID toxicity and warrant special
caution.
They are at higher risk of gastrointestinal bleeding, which is more often serious;
of acute kidney injury, because renal reserve declines with age and they more often
have compromised renal perfusion and take interacting drugs such as diuretics and
renin-angiotensin blockers; of fluid retention worsening hypertension and heart
failure; and of cardiovascular events.
They more often have the comorbidities and co-medications that contraindicate or
interact with NSAIDs.
So in the elderly I would prefer paracetamol and other measures,
use NSAIDs only where clearly needed,
at the lowest effective dose for the shortest time,
with gastroprotection and attention to renal function and interactions,
and would often avoid them altogether.
Topical NSAIDs are a safer option for localised pain.
So age substantially lowers the threshold for caution with these drugs.
What is Reye's syndrome, and why is aspirin avoided in children?
Reye's syndrome is a rare but serious condition, seen chiefly in children,
of acute non-inflammatory encephalopathy with fatty degeneration of the liver,
causing vomiting, altered consciousness progressing to coma,
and hepatic dysfunction, with a significant mortality.
Its occurrence was epidemiologically associated with the use of aspirin in children
during viral illnesses such as influenza and chickenpox.
Because of this association, aspirin is contraindicated in children,
generally those under sixteen, except for specific indications such as Kawasaki
disease under specialist care, and its avoidance in childhood has been accompanied
by a marked fall in the incidence of Reye's syndrome.
So Reye's syndrome is the reason aspirin is not used as an analgesic or antipyretic
in children, for whom paracetamol and, where appropriate,
ibuprofen are used instead.
In which situations would you regard NSAIDs as absolutely or strongly
contraindicated?
I would regard NSAIDs as contraindicated or strongly to be avoided in:
active peptic ulceration or recent gastrointestinal bleeding;
significant renal impairment, and states of threatened renal perfusion such as
hypovolaemia, significant heart failure and hepatorenal syndrome,
especially in combination with a diuretic and a renin-angiotensin blocker;
severe uncontrolled heart failure; a history of NSAID- or aspirin-induced
bronchospasm or hypersensitivity; significant bleeding risk or a procedure where
bleeding would be dangerous; the third trimester of pregnancy;
and severe hepatic impairment.
Aspirin is contraindicated in children because of Reye's syndrome.
In significant cardiovascular disease they are used with great caution,
preferring naproxen.
So the contraindications cluster around the gastric, renal, cardiovascular,
bleeding, respiratory-hypersensitivity and obstetric consequences of prostaglandin
inhibition, and recognising them is central to safe prescribing.
Summarise the key safety messages for these drugs in one final answer.
The key messages are these. Paracetamol is the safe baseline analgesic and
antipyretic, used regularly within multimodal analgesia,
with its dose reduced in the low-weight and at-risk patient and its overdose
treated promptly with acetylcysteine.
The NSAIDs are powerful opioid-sparing analgesics whose single mechanism of
prostaglandin inhibition produces gastric, renal,
platelet and cardiovascular harms, so they are added selectively,
at the lowest effective dose for the shortest time, avoided where renal perfusion,
gastric history, bleeding risk, significant cardiovascular disease,
NSAID-sensitive asthma or late pregnancy contraindicate them,
with a proton-pump inhibitor for those at gastric risk,
naproxen preferred where cardiovascular risk dominates,
and checking for the interactions with anticoagulants, antihypertensives,
diuretics, lithium and methotrexate.
Aspirin is avoided in children. Used with these precautions,
paracetamol and the NSAIDs reduce opioid requirement substantially,
which is their essential value.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, NSAIDs inhibit cyclo-oxygenase, reducing prostaglandins to give analgesic,
antipyretic and anti-inflammatory effects;
the same inhibition removes prostaglandins' protective roles,
producing the characteristic gastric, renal and platelet toxicities.
Second, COX-1 is constitutive (gastric protection, renal perfusion,
platelet thromboxane); COX-2 is mainly inducible (inflammation).
Selective COX-2 inhibitors spare the stomach but unmask a thrombotic cardiovascular
risk (rofecoxib withdrawal).
Third, Key NSAID harms: GI ulceration/bleeding,
acute kidney injury (worse with the diuretic + ACE-inhibitor 'triple whammy'),
antiplatelet effect (aspirin irreversible for the platelet lifespan),
cardiovascular thrombotic risk, and NSAID-exacerbated respiratory disease.
Fourth, Paracetamol is analgesic and antipyretic but not anti-inflammatory,
with a mainly central, incompletely understood mechanism; in overdose,
saturated conjugation shunts it to NAPQI,
depleting glutathione and causing hepatic necrosis — treated with N-acetylcysteine.
Fifth, Both are the foundation of multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia:
paracetamol as the safe baseline, NSAIDs added where renal, gastric,
cardiovascular and bleeding risk permit (naproxen lowest CV risk;
coxib/parecoxib spare platelets).
Thank you. That concludes the station.